at first sight everything in the
universe seems to follow certain rules
planets circle the stars and moons
circle the planets right well not always
sometimes some of those rocks up there
behave like cosmic bowling balls can two
planets really collide
there are around 100 billion stars in
the Milky Way and an equal number of
planets lots of those planets probably
have moons so there must be billions of
worlds in our galaxy alone of course the
distances between them are huge but
imagine for a moment that you could
observe their movements over billions of
years some of those planets would bump
into each other a few times it's just
inevitable planetary collisions occur in
several ways the gravity of one planet
can alter the orbit of another over time
stable planetary orbits around a star
can cross over sometimes several things
combine to throw planets out of their
star system entirely there's a small
chance that in 3 billion years Mercury's
orbit will become unstable and disrupt
the entire inner solar system Venus
might smash into Earth and Mars will be
sent on an interstellar journey
planetary collisions are most likely to
happen in the first few billion years of
a star systems life because it's still
forming a large number of objects are
floating around ready to smash into each
other there may have been 100 planets as
big as Mars zooming about just after
this solar system took shape at this
stage collisions can happen frequently
between two large world's the same size
what happens in one of these cosmic
accidents lots of different things can
take place ranging from the weird to the
disastrous a planet might lose its
atmosphere and pressure its entire
surface can be completely stripped away
along with all the rocky materials
inside of it if a small planet is hit by
a larger one it can instantly lose all
of its gravitational pull in the worst
case scenario both planets may
disintegrate completely but if one
survives the collision can change the
entire need
of a star system when two rocky planets
collide they usually fuse to create a
bigger world like two drops of water
joining together because of the impact
the unfortunate survivor turns into an
ocean of lava for a few million years
before cooling down again to become
solid rock the new fused world could be
made of entirely new kinds of rocks and
chemicals at the same time a huge cloud
of debris blooms above the molten planet
all that material will eventually clump
together to create new moons often it
creates one large satellite that orbits
close to the fused world and a few
smaller ones that circle much farther
out but if a rocky world hits a gas
giant the results can be a bit different
we know that jupiter has a very strong
gravity so it's quite likely that it
pulled a smaller but still very large
planet towards itself during its early
existence the experts have a few
theories about what happened if it was a
direct collision the smaller world
probably pierced Jupiter's atmosphere
like an arrow it slammed into the gas
giants core the chemicals inside Jupiter
became all mixed up between the core and
the atmosphere but overall Jupiter
swallowed the smaller planet without too
much damage but if the little world only
grazed the gas giant rather than hit it
directly it might have become trapped
and gradually disintegrated in Jupiter's
atmosphere unsurprisingly in either case
the smaller world came off a lot worse
but a rocky planets collision with a gas
giant still leaves its mark
for instance Uranus orbits the Sun lying
on its side at a 90 degree angle
compared to other planets scientists
think Uranus ended up like this after it
was literally bowled over by an object
about twice as big as Earth had there
been other planetary collisions our moon
may have appeared 4.5 billion years ago
when the young earth was hit by a planet
about the size of Mars scientists call
this lost world fajir they used to think
the he--oh only Glenn
the earth but some now say the two
planets hit each other head-on Mejia
instantly turned into lava and then
merge with the earth to become one big
molten lump the dust and material that
flew up into space eventually created
the moon so we could be standing right
now on a mixture of two different
planets there's another even crazier
theory about what happened though the
earth Thea collision may have involved a
much larger amount of energy than
previously thought
this could have completely destroyed
both worlds there was nothing left but a
cloud of vapor this became thicker and
cooler over time to eventually form an
entire new earth and it's satellite the
same thing happened to Mars for a long
time
experts thought Mars two moons Phobos
and Deimos were just asteroids that had
wandered too close to the Red Planet
they got sucked in by its gravity ending
up in orbits around it but captured
asteroids often have very strange
stretched out orbits far from the planet
that caught them Phobos and Deimos are
very close to Mars and have almost
perfect circular orbits this is often a
telltale sign that the object formed
from a disk of dust and rocks that used
to circle the planet the chances are
that Phobos and Deimos appeared in much
the same way as our own moan something
massive hit the young Mars and the cloud
of dust then clumped together to form
the two rocks the far-off world of Pluto
has one really big moon called Charon
and four smaller satellites all of them
have near-perfect circular orbits that's
a pattern
identical to Mars and Earth so Pluto
also had an explosive encounter with
another big rock billions of years ago
with Mercury the situation may have been
a little different although no less
dramatic the little grey world has a
thin crust in large planetary core this
has led some scientists to think it may
have once experienced a huge impact that
tore off several layers of the planet
the layers are the rocky materials that
are often packed in between the planets
core and its surface
mercury so the theory goes got peeled
like an onion on the other hand Venus
doesn't have a single moon well it's
taken its fair share of hits from
asteroids it seems nothing really big
ever came its way so ultimately with
planetary collisions it all comes down
to luck I'm guessing some planets are
singing if it weren't for bad luck I'd
have no luck at all yeah
[Music]